The Intelligence of Flowers
I
Here I wish simply to recall several facts known to all
botanists. I have made no discovery, and my modest contribution comes down to a few basic observations. It
goes without saying that I do not intend to review every
proof of intelligence offered to us by plants. Those proofs
are ongoing and innumerable, especially among ﬂowers,
where the striving of plant life for light and spirit is at its
most focused.
If we allow for some awkward or unfortunate plants
and ﬂowers, none is entirely lacking in wisdom and ingenuity. All struggle to accomplish their task; all have the
magniﬁcent ambition to overrun and conquer the surface
of the earth by thereupon multiplying inﬁnitely the form
of existence they represent. To reach this goal, they need,
on account of the law that binds them to the soil, to overcome difﬁculties much greater than those facing the multiplication of animals. For that reason most of them have
1

© 2008 State University of New York Press, Albany

recourse to ruses, schemes, mechanisms, and traps that in
respect, for instance, of mechanics, ballistics, aviation, or
observation of insects often predate the inventions and
knowledge of mankind.

II
It would be superﬂuous to redraw the picture of the great
systems of ﬂoral fertilization: the play of stamens and pistil,
the seductiveness of scents, the appeal of harmonious and
striking colors, the development of nectar, totally useless
to the ﬂower, and which it manufactures only to attract
and hold the foreign liberator, the messenger of love, bee,
bumblebee, ﬂy, butterﬂy, moth, which must bring it the kiss
of the distant, invisible, motionless lover.
This plant world that strikes us as so tranquil, so resigned, where all seems to be acceptance, silence, obedience, reverence, is on the contrary one wherein the revolt
against destiny is at its most vehement and most obstinate.
The essential organ, the nourishing organ of the plant, its
root, attaches it indissolubly to the soil. If it is difﬁcult to
ascertain, among the great laws that overwhelm us, the one
that weighs heaviest on our shoulders, for the plant there is
no doubt: it is the law that condemns it to immobility from
birth to death. So it knows better than we, who fritter our
energies, against what it must ﬁrst arise. And the energy
of its obsession, as it rises from the shadows of its roots to
organize itself and to blossom in the light of its ﬂower, is
2

© 2008 State University of New York Press, Albany

an incomparable spectacle. It strains its whole being in one
single plan: to escape above ground from the fatality below;
to elude and transgress the dark and weighty law, to free itself, to break the narrow sphere, to invent or invoke wings,
to escape as far as possible, to conquer the space wherein
fate encloses it, to approach another kingdom, to enter a
moving, animated world. Is not the fact that it succeeds in
doing so as surprising as if we were to succeed in living
outside the time assigned us by another destiny or in entering a universe freed from the weightiest laws of matter?
We shall see that the ﬂower sets man a prodigious example
of insubordination, courage, perseverance, and ingenuity. If
we had put into trying to uplift the various inevitabilities
that weigh us down—those, for instance, of pain, old age,
and death—even half the energy that some tiny ﬂower in
our garden has spent, we could be forgiven for thinking
our fate would be very different from what it is.

III
In most plants this need for movement, this appetite for
space, manifests itself concurrently in both ﬂower and fruit.
It is easily explicable in the case of the fruit; or, at any
rate, it only reveals a less complex experience and foresight. Contrary to what occurs in the animal kingdom,
and because of the terrible law of absolute immobility, the
main and worst enemy of the seed is the paternal strain.
We are in a strange world where the parents, incapable of
3

© 2008 State University of New York Press, Albany

moving, know they are condemned to stiﬂe or starve their
offspring. All seed that falls at the foot of a tree or plant
is lost or will sprout in a hard place. Hence the immense
effort to cast off the yoke and conquer space. Hence the
marvelous systems of scattering, of propulsion, of aviation,
that we ﬁnd in all parts of the forest and on the plain;
among others, merely to mention in passing a few of the
most curious: the winged screw or samara of the maple,
the bract of the lime, the gliding-machine of the thistle,
dandelion, and salsify; the detonating springs of the spurge,
the extraordinary squirting pear of the balsam apple, the
woolen hooks of the eriophorous plants; and a thousand
other unexpected and astonishing mechanisms, for there
is, so to speak, no seed that has not invented some method
wholly suited to itself for escaping the maternal shadow.
We simply would not believe, if we had not practiced
botany, just how much imagination and genius expends
itself in all the greenery that delights the eye. Look, for
instance, at the pretty seed pod of the scarlet pimpernel,
the ﬁve valves of the garden balsam, the ﬁve spring-loaded capsules of the geranium, etc. While you are at it, do
not forget to examine the common poppyhead that one
ﬁnds at any herbalist’s. There is, in that nice big head, a
prudence and foresight worthy of the highest praise. We
know that it contains thousands of extremely ﬁne, tiny
black seeds. The goal is to scatter these seeds in the most
adroit manner and as far as possible. If the capsule containing them were to split, fall, or open up underneath,
the precious black powder would simply form a useless
4

© 2008 State University of New York Press, Albany

heap at the foot of the stem. But it can only emerge from
apertures pierced high up on the husk. Once ripened, this
leans over on its peduncle, sways at the slightest breath
of air and, literally with the very same gesture as a sower,
scatters the seeds in space.
Shall I speak of the seeds that plan their own dispersal
by birds, and which, to entice them, huddle, like the mistletoe, the juniper, the serviceberry, etc., within a sugary
husk? There is such reasoning in this, such an understanding of ﬁnal causes that we hardly dare insist on it for fear
of renewing the naive errors of Bernardin de Saint-Pierre.
Yet the facts cannot otherwise be explained. The sugary
husk is as useless to the seed as is the nectar, which attracts
the bees, to the ﬂower. The bird eats the fruit because it is
sweet and at the same time swallows the seed, which is indigestible. The bird takes off and shortly thereafter rends the
seed just as it received it but stripped of its husk and ready
to sprout far from the dangers of its place of birth.

IV
But let us get back to simpler schemes. Pick from the roadside, in the ﬁrst ﬁstful to hand, a blade of some grass or
other, and you will catch a small, independent, unﬂagging,
unexpected intelligence at work. Here are two poor creeping plants that you could have encountered a thousand
times on your walks, for they may be found everywhere,
even in the most barren corners where a pinch of soil has
5

© 2008 State University of New York Press, Albany

strayed. They are two varieties of wild medic (Medicago),
two weeds in the humblest sense of that word. One bears
a reddish ﬂower, the other a yellow powder puff the size of
a pea. To see them slide and hide themselves in the lawn,
among the proud grasses, one would never imagine that,
well before the illustrious geometrician and physician of
Syracuse, they have discovered the amazing properties of
the Archimedean screw and attempted to apply it not to
the raising of liquids but to the art of ﬂying. So they lodge
their seeds in easy spirals, made up of three or four admirably constructed revolutions, reckoning thereby to delay
their fall and consequently, with the aid of the wind, to
prolong their aerial voyage. One of them, the yellow one,
has even perfected the device of the red one by decorating
the edges of the spiral with a double row of spikes, with
the clear intention of hooking it in passing to either human clothing or animal ﬂeece. Clearly it hopes to ally the
advantages of eriophily—that is to say, the scattering of
seeds by sheep, goats, rabbits, etc.—to those of anemophily,
that is to say, scattering by wind.
What is most touching in this entire huge effort is
its uselessness. The poor red and yellow medics have made
an error of judgment. Their extraordinary screws are of no
use to them. They can only work if they fall from a certain
height, from the top of a tall tree or from a grassy knoll;
but, constructed at grass level, they have only a quarterturn to make before hitting the ground. We have here a
curious example of the mistakes, the trial and error, the experiments and the minor miscalculations, frequent enough,
6

© 2008 State University of New York Press, Albany

of nature: for only those who have barely studied it would
claim that nature never errs.
In passing, let us note that other varieties of medic
(not to mention the clover, another leguminous and papilionaceous plant that is virtually indistinguishable from the
one that concerns us here) have not adopted these aeronautical devices and retain the primitive method of the
pod. In the case of one of them, the Medicago aurantiaca, we
may easily grasp the transition from highly elaborate pod
to screw. Another variety, the Medicago scutellata, rounds off
the screw in the form of a bowl. It seems therefore that we
are witnessing the stirring spectacle of a kind of invention
in progress, the efforts of a family that has not yet worked
out its destiny and is seeking the best way of ensuring its
future. Is it not perhaps in the course of this research that,
having been disappointed by the spiral, the yellow medic
adds the spikes or the woolen hooks, telling itself not unreasonably that since its foliage attracts sheep, it is inevitable and proper that sheep should assume responsibility
for its procreation? And, in the end, is it not on account of
this fresh effort and this bright idea that the yellow-ﬂowered medic is inﬁnitely more widespread than its stronger
red-ﬂowered cousin?

V
It is not only in the seed or ﬂower but in the whole plant,
stems, leaves, roots that we discover, if we but lower our
7

© 2008 State University of New York Press, Albany

heads for a moment over their humble work, many traces
of a lively and shrewd intelligence. Remind yourselves of
the magniﬁcent efforts of thwarted branches seeking the
light, or the ingenious and courageous struggle of trees
in danger. For my part, I shall never forget the admirable
example of heroism set to me by an enormous hundredyear-old laurel the other day in Provence, in the wild and
delightful gorges of the Loup, fragrant all over with violets.You could easily read on its tortuous and, so to speak,
convulsive trunk all the drama of its tough and difﬁcult
life. A bird or the wind, masters of destiny both, had carried the seed to the side of a rock that drops like an iron
curtain, and the tree was born there, two hundred meters
above the torrent, inaccessible and solitary, among scorching and barren stones. From its very ﬁrst hours, it had sent
its blind roots on a long and painful search for precious
water and soil. But this was only the congenital concern
of a species that knows the arid Midi. The young stem had
to resolve a much graver and more unexpected problem:
it set out on a vertical plane, so that its head, instead of
reaching for the sky, leaned over the gulf. It had therefore,
despite the crushing weight of the branches, to set the ﬁrst
surge straight, stubbornly to bend the frustrated trunk just
above the surface of the rock, and thus—like a swimmer
throwing back his head—by an incessant will, tension, and
contraction, to sustain the heavy crown of leaves rising up
into the sky.
From that point on, around that vital knot, were
concentrated all the preoccupations, all the energy, all the
8

© 2008 State University of New York Press, Albany

conscious, free genius of the plant. The monstrous bend,
grown abnormally large, revealed one by one the successive anxieties of a kind of thought that knew how to avail
itself of the warnings given to it by rain and gale.Year after
year the dome of foliage grew weightier, with no other
concern but to expand in the heat and light, while a dark
canker ate away deeply at the tragic arm maintaining it in
space. Then, obeying goodness knows what order of the
instinct, two solid roots, two hairy cables, emerging from
the trunk at more than two feet above the bend, came to
moor it to the granite face. Had they truly been brought
forth by distress, or else had they been waiting, perhaps
with foresight, since the ﬁrst days, for the critical hour of
danger in order to enhance the value of their assistance?
Or was it just a happy coincidence? What human eye will
ever capture these silent dramas, too long-lasting for our
brief lives?*

VI
Among the plants that offer the most striking proof of
initiative, those we might call animated or capable of feelings would merit detailed study. I shall content myself by
*Let us put this together with the intelligent action of another root of which
Brandis (On Life and Polarity) recounts to us the exploits. In getting stuck in
the earth, it had met the old sole of a boot; to pass this obstacle, which it was
apparently the ﬁrst of its species to ﬁnd in its way, it subdivided itself in as
many parts as there were holes left by the stitch points, then, once past the
obstacle, it reunited itself and knitted together again all its various rootlets,
in such a way as to reconstitute a single, homogeneous taproot.


recalling the delightful terrors of that sensitive plant we
all know, the shrinking mimosa. Other herbs with spontaneous movements are less well known; the Hedysareae, in
particular, among which the Hedysarum gyrans or swaying
sainfoin, which bestirs itself in a surprising way. This small
leguminous plant, originally from Bengal but often grown
in our hothouses, performs a kind of nonstop, intricate
dance in honor of the light. Its leaves divide themselves
into three leaﬂets, one broad and terminal, the other two
narrow and planted at the base of the ﬁrst. Each of these
leaﬂets has its own different movement. They live in incessant, rhythmical, and almost chronometrical agitation.
They are so sensitive to light that their dance slows down
or speeds up according to whether the clouds hide or reveal the chink of sky they face.They are, as we can see, true
photometers, and this well before Crookes’s invention of
the natural otheoscopes.

VII
But these plants, to which we should add the Droseras,
the Dionaeas, and many others, are nervous beings already
going slightly beyond the mysterious and probably imaginary ridge that separates the plant from the animal kingdom. We have no need to climb that far, and we ﬁnd as
much intelligence and almost as much visible spontaneity
at the other end of the world that concerns us, in the lower
depths where the plant is barely distinguishable from silt or
10

© 2008 State University of New York Press, Albany


